# Narcan-Trend-Analysis

Emergency Medical Services (EMS), as the name suggests provides medical aid in emergency situations. EMS can also be recognized as ambulance services or paramedic services; they include emergency dispatch services, emergency medical assessment (U.S National Library of Medicine, 2018). They are one of the first responders in emergency situations providing out-of-hospital medical care and transport to the nearest medical facility. Medical situations which need only basic skills and non-emergency transportations are handled by Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) or other personnel that work in the EMS while complex situations are handled by skilled doctors and nurses in a healthcare facility (U.S National Library of Medicine, 2018).EMS is a system of coordinated response and emergency medical care, generally involving multiple people and agencies. EMS operates at the junction between health care, public health, and public safety.

In many cases, EMS are able to treat patients with medications/drugs needed. Opioids are drug substances categorized under narcotic analgesics which are medically used for pain management and are the leading cause of accidental deaths (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2017). The misuse and addiction to opioids including prescription pain relievers is a serious national crisis that affects public health, social and economic welfare (Indiana State Department of Health, 2018). The opioid epidemic sweeping across the United States has significantly affected the state of Indiana (State of Indiana, 2017). The use of prescription opioid pain relievers for non-medical reasons and the use of illicit opioids such as heroin, cocaine, has led to an unprecedented increase in overdose deaths in Indiana (Indiana State Department of Health, 2018). Thus in recent years, EMS personnel have been equipped with narcan, an opioid overdose reversing medication, given to individuals experiencing symptoms related to opioid overdose (Adapt Pharma, 2018).
